# Visualization and Analysis of the UNL Game Development Club Member Data

Authors: Casey Lafferty and Jianghao Wang

## Abstract
The UNL Game Development Club, founded in Fall 2018 by a group of Computer Science students, has been steadily growing in both size and student background. The group hosts a variety of activities such as game development demos, hosting guest speakers, and competing in game development competitions. The club also manages its own mailing list of 150 people. However, the current club ofﬁcers have noticed a disparity between the amount of interested students on the mailing list and the average weekly meeting attendance rate. Moreover, the club still lacked an efﬁcient means of tracking member information and demographics, attendance records, meeting information, and other logistical records. This project targets these organizational concerns by building a scalable relational database to assist the club ofﬁcers with record keeping. Further, we implemented four different types of graphics for analyzing the relationship between attendance data and member background. Through this analysis, we identiﬁed the consistently interested under-represented majors to assist in guiding future recruiting efforts.

## I. Introduction
The University of Nebraska-Lincoln Game Development Club (UNL GDC) was founded in the Fall 2018 semester by a group of Computer Science students who are all passionate about the video game industry. With genuine hope of providing a platform for other students who share similar interests, the original members decided to run the club ﬁrst as an unofﬁcial group in the Fall 2018 semester and registered to be an ofﬁcial Registered Student Organization for the Spring 2019 semester. In its ﬁrst three semesters, the club has hosted around 30 regular meetings and activities and around 10 events both on-campus and off-campus. These activities include game development instructional demos, game development competitions, industry guest speakers, and university-related recruiting events. Gradually, the club’s mailing list has grown from 6 recipients in September 2018 to 150 recipients as of November 2019, which shows a steady growth in popularity and campus presence.

Through recruiting and expanding the club, the club ofﬁcers became aware of the disparity between the number of email recipients and the average meeting attendance. Moreover, the club has only tracked member information, attendance records, and other logistics through document ﬁles, which implies a need for an alternative approach. Therefore, this project targets these organizational concerns by building a scalable relational database using MySQL [7] to assist the club ofﬁcers with maintaining records. MySQL was chosen as the database language due to its performance capabilities, vast documentation, and ease of use. The authors also used Java programs to import and format data from previous club records to the MySQL database. For purposes of this project, the data was scrubbed of any personally identiﬁable information and replaced with fake names, usernames, and other data to protect the members’ privacy. Any information that did not qualify as personally identiﬁable information, such as majors, school year, and attendance records, was not replaced as that was the target of the project’s analysis.

The remainder of this report will detail the development, visualization, analysis, and future recommendations. Section II uses an ER Diagram to illustrate the database design. Section III describes the implementation process for visualizing the data and explains the ﬁndings. Sections IV and V will explain the authors’ conclusions and recommendations for future work. 

## II. Database Design
Prior to this project, the previous method of record keeping included maintaining attendance records, notes, and more in shared Word documents. The primary downfall to this setup was that not all documents were complete or maintained a consistent format. As this is not an effective method, this project aimed to provide the UNL GDC club ofﬁcers with a scalable, easily searchable manner of maintaining records. The authors determined that each of the shared documents included a set of key information: active member names, meeting types, basic meeting notes, dates, relative event information, and other minor details. In collaboration with the club ofﬁcers, the authors elaborated on this information to compile a complete set of meeting entries, event entries, member information (both past and present), and a list of emails that can be used in a custom email script.

As shown in Figure 1, the database is structured in a relational schema and is centered around the members table, which tracks the members’ names, school year, major, and information for club-related resources. From the members table, the database can track which meetings each member has attended, which events they have attended, and which emails the member has on ﬁle with the club. For each meeting, the database tracks the main topic of the meeting, the date, the location, and what type of meeting was held. The meeting types include, but are not limited to, demos, elections, and work days. For each event, the database tracks the name of the event, the location, the type of event, the start date, and the end date. The start date and end date are signiﬁcant for tracking multiple-day events such as competitions. The types of events include, but are not limited to, competitions, recruiting events, and talks with guest speakers.

Ultimately, the purpose of this database is to maintain data in a scalable, searchable manner. One major use case to consider is determining which members maintained voting member attendance requirements. This structure easily allows for querying the database to determine which members attended during which months. Another use case to consider is determining which students come from which majors. Further, prior to the creation of this database, the member demographic was not previously well-documented so the authors had to collaborate with club ofﬁcers to complete the database entries for all members. With this relational data structure, the ofﬁcers can now query the database and determine which majors are well-represented, which majors are under-represented, and other useful demographic information to facilitate recruitment. In addition to current records, the club ofﬁcers are also free to create new record categories in the future and can map that to existing member information without effort. A potential extension could be appending ﬁnances and fundraising records, including tracking dues, member “accounts”, and more. Considering these use cases, the authors have determined that the goal of a scalable, easily searchable record keeping medium has been satisﬁed. 

## III. Visualization and Analysis
To assist in the analysis of the member background and attendance records, the data was exported from MySQL to various ﬁle formats to be used in D3JS-based web graphic templates [4]. This project used four templates from ObservableHQ.com [5] and bl.ocks.org [6] that best ﬁt the data and visualized it in an intuitive manner for new ofﬁcers to maintain. The four main templates we picked are simple dashboard with pie and bar [8], line graphs [1], zoomable sunburst [3], and circle packing [2]. The pie and bar chart and the line graphs delineate attendance trends from different perspectives, the other two graphics present member background information i.e. major, schoolyear. Whereas some diagrams are similar to each other, each portrays the target information in a different manner. 

As shown in Figure 2, the pie and bar chart is an interactable visualization of the club’s attendance records. The bar chart shows the general attendance performance for meetings across entire three semesters. The pie chart uses a number of distinct colors to represent different majors, and then partition into pieces based on the total attendance of students from each major. When the user hovers over the bars representing each meeting, as depicted in Figure 6, the pie chart likewise shifts to reﬂect the distribution of the students in attendance for that selected meeting. Then if the user hovers over the pie chart, the bar chart likewise shifts to show the attendance at each meeting of students from the corresponding major. Figure 7 gives a concrete example of this use case. Likewise, the line graph helps analyze these trends but with the added view of overlaying all three semesters. As shown in Figure 4, the user can see trends that may apply to all semesters, such as if attendance swells in the middle of the semester or dips at the end of the semester. The sunburst graphic helps show member background information across all three semesters in a pie chart type of graphic, including the major and school year for each student. Likewise, the circle packing graphic shows similar information but in a unique manner by having the size of each bubble reﬂect the number of students in each category. For instance, as there are more students majored in Computer Science than those from Software Engineering enrolling our club, the bubble representing Computer Science is larger. The different types of graphics will likely allow future ofﬁcers to gather different types of information to assist in recruiting and event planning.

Using the charts, the authors identiﬁed three main patterns in the data as follows: (1) The overall member attendance has increased steadily throughout the following three semesters. (2) The majority of club members, including past and present students, are Computer Science students but Software Engineering students make up a recent majority of active members. (3) There are several under-represented majors that consistently and actively participate in the club activities. The authors also identiﬁed minor ﬁndings as follows: (1) Some club members have only participated for one semester before leaving the club. (2) The overall member retention rate is low. In general, the analysis results provide a strong foundation for the club ofﬁcers to improve both recruiting efforts and event planning. The authors have publicly posted the visual graphics via the UNL CSE servers at [9].

## IV. Conclusions
This project was designed to assist in managing and maintaining records for the UNL Game Development Club. This database supports searchable and scalable mechanisms that facilitate for maintaining club records and enforcing policies such as attendance requirements. Further, by applying various templates, the authors visualized the member data and attendance trends to assist the UNL GDC ofﬁcers in focusing their recruiting and event planning efforts. The analysis concluded that the club shows a trend of continuous growth but has under-represented majors that consistently and actively participate in the club activities. In addition, the analysis also shows issues with retention that the ofﬁcers should address in the future.

## V. Future Work
There are some records associated with club management that do not currently exist, including ﬁnancial records. However, when it comes time to maintain these types of records, they can easily be added to the database and mapped to keep track of member ”accounts”, member dues, and more. In addition to this, it would be beneﬁcial to provide a graphical front-end application to facilitate maintaining these records. Lastly, the analysis of the data did not consider any relation between attendance and school year, which might prove to be an interesting comparison and useful in improving retention. We plan to implement it in the near future. 

## Acknowledgment
This project was advised by Dr. Daggumati from Computer Science Department in University of Nebraska Lincoln. We thank ofﬁcers from Game Development Club who provided detail information about the data that greatly assisted our project.

## References
[1] M. Bostock. Inline lables/d3/observable. https://observablehq.com/@d3/inline-labels, October 2011. [Online].

[2] M. Bostock. Zoomable circle packing/d3/observable. https://observablehq.com/@d3/zoomable-circle-packing, November 2018. [Online].

[3] M. Bostock. Zoomable sunburst/d3/observable. https://observablehq.com/@d3/zoomable-sunburst, April 2018. [Online].

[4] M. Bostock. D3.js-data driven documents. https://d3js.org/, 2019. [Online].

[5] M. Bostock, M. Meckfessel, et al. The magic notbook for exploring data /observable. https://observablehq.com/, 2019. [Online].

[6] M. Bostock, M. Meckfessel, et al. Popular blocks - bl.ocks.org. https://bl.ocks.org/, 2019. [Online].

[7] Oracle Corporation. Mysql. https://www.mysql.com/, 2019. [Online].

[8] Pasha. Dashboard - bl.ocks.org. http://bl.ocks.org/NPashaP/96447623ef4d342ee09b, June 2018. [Online].

[9] R. Lafferty, J. Wang. Visualization of unl member data. https://cse.unl.edu/∼rlafferty/Vis, December 2019. [Online].